# Flash flooding in Lilongwe

Flash flooding are the most destructive natural hazards with the highest mortality per event (Jonkman, 2005). It is believed that the combined effect of climate change and urbanization will result into more frequent, heavier rainfall-runoff and consequently more flash floods. In Malawi, flash flooding is the most common form of flooding in urban communities. Despite their frequency of occurrence and perceived damage information about flood flooding continue to be scanty. Lack of documentation on past flooding events prevent development of scientific foundation for development of mitigation measures. The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction suggest that countries reduce existing flood risks. Flood risk can be understood by exploring the exposed population particularly by examining the interactions between hazard and conditions of vulnerability. Flood risk assessment depends on availability of geophysical and social economic data (Lerner-Lam, 2007). Often times social economic data is collected as part of population assessments through questionnaire surveys. On the other hand, flood hazard maps are developed by using myriad of techniques including satellite observations, and hydrogical modelling. With flood hazard maps, populations exposed to flooding can be easily identified and mitigation measures can be implemented afterwards. Flood exposure refers to the inventory of elements in an area where hazard could occur (Field et al., 2012). Flood extent maps provide an overview of the hazard and can be overlayed building footprints to identify clusters of households that are exposed to flooding in a community of interest (Qiang, 2019). Population identified from such work can be targeted for necessary preventive measures and mitigation interventions to minimize the impact of future flooding. Hazard maps have previously used in development of flood preparations intervention (Mudashiru et al., 2021). Additionally, hazard mapping plays can help in identifying population exposed to flood hazard; providing a starting point for examining their conditions of vulnerability and understanding of overall flood risk (Ref). But development of flood hazard maps is challenging. Flood hazard maps can be modelled using hydrological modelling techniques (Ref). This approach requires detailed data on precipitation and waterflow, and this data is usually not available (Ref). Real-time flood hazard maps can be created from imagery captured by events using earth observation satellites and data from water gauge sensors. Mapping large scale flooding is supported by (Cite the charter; cite Copernicus Emergency Management Service). Consequently, many small-scale flooding events particularly flash flooding occur within considerably short time interval and sometimes relatively small geographical areas are affected (Ref). Even though flash floods can be mapped by earth observation satellites by mere coincidence, but generally alternative tools for rapid mapping of the extent of flash flooding are needed. In southern Malawi, estimating flood extent using images captured by Unmanned Aerial Vehicles has been previously tested (Wouters et al., 2021).

In light of these, this project explore the utilization of mobile phone GPS for mapping observed flood extent. Specifically, the study addressed the following objectives: (1) collect data on river extension due to flooding using smartphones (2) Develop flood extent maps based on the collected data (3) Determine potential factors associated with exposure to flood hazard. 

The maps can be accessed here:[Flooding](https://www.facebook.com/patrick.kalonde/)

Note: This is a project led by volunteers who believe that local action is indispensable to achieve sustainable urban development. For questions contact Patrick Kalonde through [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/patrick.kalonde/).

